Title: NeuroPB: Scaling Neural Decoding with Pretrained Behavioral Representations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.04389v1

Published Time: Thu, 06 Aug 2026 00:29:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# NeuroPB: Scaling Neural Decoding with Pretrained Behavioral Representations 

# Luyao Jin 1, Yonghao Song 2, Huan Zhao 1, Vincent C. K. Cheung 3, Wei-Hsin Liao 1∗

> 1

Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 

> 2

Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University 

> 3

School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong lyjin@link.cuhk.edu.hk, whliao@cuhk.edu.hk 

Abstract 

Decoding continuous motor trajectories from neural activity is essential for developing practical brain–computer interfaces (BCIs). However, current neural decoders are constrained by the limited scale and heterogeneity of neural recordings. In contrast, behavioral data can be collected more readily and at substantially larger scale from humans, animals, simulations, and robotic systems. Here, we introduce NeuroPB, a frame-work that scales neural decoding by transferring knowledge from pretrained behavioral representations. NeuroPB first pre-trains a motor encoder on large-scale motor behavior data and then aligns neural activity with the resulting behavioral repre-sentation space using a limited set of paired neural–behavioral recordings. A neural encoder and lightweight motor decoder are subsequently optimized to reconstruct continuous move-ment from the aligned neural representations. Across multiple macaque motor datasets, behavioral pretraining improves tra-jectory decoding, including an 11% R2 increase on center-out and 8% on random-target compared with training the motor encoder from scratch. Notably, pretraining on robotic trajectories achieves performance comparable to pretraining on macaque trajectories, demonstrating that transferable kine-matic structure is shared across biological and artificial mod-els. Moreover, decoding performance improves as the scale and diversity of robotic pretraining data increase, when the amount of neural data is fixed. Pretraining also enhances generalization across recording sessions, subjects, and mo-tor tasks, with only 10% calibration needed to match training from scratch. Overall, these results establish behavioral pre-training as a scalable source for neural decoding and provide a promising route toward high-performance and calibration-efficient BCIs under limited neural data. 

# Introduction 

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) provide a direct pathway for translating neural activity into executable commands, en-abling users to interact with prosthetic limbs, robotic systems, computers, and other external devices (Willsey et al. 2025a). Among the capabilities required by practical BCIs, decoding continuous motor behavior is particularly important because natural interaction depends not only on identifying a discrete intention, but also on reconstructing how a movement evolves over time (Lee et al. 2025; Willsey et al. 2025b). Despite sub-stantial progress, accurately decoding continuous behavioral 

> ∗

Corresponding author. 

Figure 1: Conceptual overview of NeuroPB. NeuroPB aligns neural activity with a behavioral representation pretrained on scalable macaque and robotic trajectories, enabling continu-ous trajectory decoding with generalization across recording sessions, subjects, and motor tasks. trajectories from neural activity remains challenging. Neural activity is heterogeneous across recording sessions, individ-uals, and motor tasks, while collecting sufficiently large and well-annotated neural datasets is expensive and technically demanding. Existing neural decoding methods learn direct mappings from neural activity to movement trajectories using end-to-end models (Pandarinath et al. 2018; Glaser et al. 2020; Dyer et al. 2017). Although these methods achieve good per-formance within the training distribution, their performance often degrades when applied to unseen recording sessions, subjects, or motor tasks. To improve generalization, recent studies have explored large-scale neural pretraining (Zhang et al. 2025; Azabou et al. 2025) and self-supervised learning (Schneider, Lee, and Mathis 2023). These approaches aim to learn general neural representations before adapting the model to a downstream decoding task. However, their scal-ability remains constrained by the limited availability and pronounced heterogeneity of neural recordings across sub-jects, sessions, brain regions, and acquisition devices. Conse-quently, increasing the scale of neural pretraining alone may not provide a readily scalable solution. This limitation mo-tivates us to hypothesize: rather than relying exclusively on scarce and heterogeneous neural recordings, can prior knowl-edge about behavior itself be used to guide the learning of more transferable neural representations? In this work, we approach neural decoding from the be-havioral side. Recent advances in embodied AI have pro-moted large, diverse, and standardized manipulation trajec-arXiv:2608.04389v1 [cs.LG] 5 Aug 2026 tories (Liu et al. 2023; Walke et al. 2023; O’Neill et al. 2024). Compared with neural recordings, robotic behavior can be collected at substantially larger scales (Ye et al. 2023; O’Neill et al. 2024). Biological movements, in contrast, nat-urally contain trial-to-trial variability (Fishbach et al. 2007). Despite their differences in embodiment, biological and arti-ficial systems share motor control objectives and can exhibit reusable behavioral structure (Merel, Botvinick, and Wayne 2019). We therefore hypothesize that representations learned from large-scale behavioral trajectories can provide transfer-able motor priors for neural decoding. To investigate this hypothesis, we propose NeuroPB , a 

Neuro n decoding framework with Pretrained Behavioral representation that bridges neural activity with representa-tions extracted by a pretrained behavior model. NeuroPB uses a pretrained motor encoder to define a structured behav-ioral representation space. During training, a neural encoder maps neural activity into this space, allowing pretrained be-havioral representations to serve as anchors that guide the neural encoder toward capturing motor-relevant information. The resulting neural representation is then passed to a motor decoder to reconstruct the corresponding continuous move-ment. At inference time, the pretrained motor encoder is no longer required: the neural encoder directly extracts a motor-informed representation from the neural signal, and the motor decoder generates the predicted trajectory. In this way, NeuroPB transfers behavioral knowledge to the neural decoding model without requiring behavioral inputs during deployment. We evaluate NeuroPB on multiple macaque neural datasets covering different recording sessions, subjects, and motor tasks. Our experiments show that pretrained behavioral rep-resentations consistently facilitate neural trajectory decoding and that scaling trajectory pretraining leads to stronger over-all performance. Notably, trajectory encoders pretrained on large-scale robotic data provide effective priors for decoding biological movements, supporting the existence of transfer-able behavioral structure across embodiments. NeuroPB also exhibits improved generalization to unseen sessions, sub-jects, and tasks, while requiring fewer paired neural and tra-jectory samples during calibration. The main contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We propose the NeuroPB , a neural decoding framework that uses pretrained behavioral representations as anchors to learn motor-informed neural representations. 

• We demonstrate that behavioral pretraining consistently outperforms training the framework from scratch, estab-lishing the importance of behavioral pretraining for neural trajectory decoding. 

• We investigate the scaling of the pretrained motor encoder and show that larger-scale and diverse behavioral datasets yield better decoding performance. 

• We evaluate NeuroPB on macaque datasets, demonstrat-ing improved calibration efficiency and robust generaliza-tion across recording sessions, subjects, and motor tasks. 

# Related Work 

Motor Neural Decoding 

Motor neural decoding seeks to infer behavioral variables from neural population activity. Early approaches map neural activity to movement trajectories, such as Wiener filters (Car-mena et al. 2003), Kalman filters (Glaser et al. 2020), statisti-cal models (Pandarinath et al. 2018), recurrent networks (Ye and Pandarinath 2021), sequential autoencoders (Keshtkaran et al. 2022), and other deep architectures (Tian et al. 2026). Although these methods can achieve high decoding accuracy within the recording sessions, they often generalize poorly to unseen sessions, subjects, or motor tasks. To improve gener-alization, recent studies have pretrained neural encoders on recordings collected from multiple sessions, subjects, and tasks. NEDS learns generalized latent population dynamics across datasets (Zhang et al. 2025), CEBRA constructs be-haviorally structured neural representations using contrastive learning (Schneider, Lee, and Mathis 2023), and large-scale frameworks such as POYO+ and NDT3 integrate heteroge-neous neural recordings through neural pretraining (Azabou et al. 2025; Ye et al. 2026). These approaches demonstrate that increasing the scale of neural pretraining can improve adaptation to new recording sessions. Nevertheless, their scalability remains dependent on the availability of large, high-quality neural datasets, which are costly to collect and heterogeneous across subjects, sessions, brain regions, and acquisition devices. Our work therefore explores a comple-mentary direction: learning transferable behavioral repre-sentations from large-scale behavioral trajectories and using them to guide neural representation learning with limited paired neural–behavioral data. 

Contrastive Learning in Neural Decoding 

Contrastive learning provides an effective mechanism for neural decoding by bringing matched neural–target represen-tations closer while separating mismatched samples, thereby emphasizing information shared across modalities. Inspired by the CLIP framework for large-scale vision–language alignment (Radford et al. 2021), this strategy has been increasingly adopted to connect neural signals with be-haviorally meaningful representation spaces. CEBRA uses contrastive sampling conditioned on behavior or time to learn consistent neural embeddings across sessions, ani-mals, and recording modalities (Schneider, Lee, and Mathis 2023). Contrastive alignment is employed between neural and speech representations for speech decoding (Défossez et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2026b). Similar ideas have been explored in visual decoding, where aligned EEG/fMRI re-sponses with image embeddings are used for object recog-nition (Song et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2026a; Xia et al. 2024). Unlike prior work that relies primarily on paired neu-ral–target data, our framework also leverages independently collected, large-scale robotic trajectories to pretrain a scal-able behavioral representation, which is then aligned with neural activity for transferable motor decoding. This design enables neural decoding to benefit from scalable behavioral data beyond biological recordings. Figure 2: (A) A motor encoder is pretrained on masked trajectory reconstruction using macaque or robotic trajectories and then frozen to produce behavioral representations. (B) Contrastive learning aligns paired neural and behavioral representations while separating unpaired samples. (C) During inference, the neural encoder maps spike activity into the neural representation, from which a motor decoder reconstructs movement trajectories. 

# Method 

Our framework learns transferable neural representations by using a pretrained behavioral representation space as behav-ioral supervision. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the method consists of three stages. First, the motor encoder is pretrained through masked trajectory reconstruction using macaque trajectories, scale-matched robotic trajectories, or large-scale robotic tra-jectories, while a randomly initialized encoder serves as the scratch condition. The resulting motor encoder is then kept frozen. Second, the neural encoder is optimized with a con-trastive objective that aligns matched neural and behavioral representations while separating mismatched pairs. Finally, a lightweight motor decoder reconstructs the continuous move-ment trajectory from the aligned neural representation. De-tailed network architectures are provided in the Appendix. 

Motor Encoder 

We construct the motor encoder based on the Transformer structure, which learns structured movement representations through masked trajectory reconstruction (Wen et al. 2023). Given a trajectory segment 

P = [ p1, p2, . . . , pT ], pt ∈ Rdp , (1) where pt denotes the movement position at time step t and 

dp = 2 for the (x, y ), a subset of time steps M ⊆ { 1, . . . , T }

is randomly masked. The input token at each time step is defined as 

eet =

(Epos (pt) + Etime (t), t / ∈ M ,

emask + Etime (t), t ∈ M , (2) where Epos (·) projects trajectory coordinates into the model dimension, Etime (·) encodes temporal order, and emask is a learnable mask embedding. The resulting token sequence is processed by the motor encoder fθm :

Hm = fθm (ee1, ee2, . . . , eeT ) , (3) where 

Hm = [ hm 

> 1

, hm 

> 2

, . . . , hmT ] ∈ RT ×D (4) denotes the contextualized trajectory tokens. A lightweight prediction head gϕ reconstructs the masked trajectory coor-dinates: 

bpt = gϕ (hmt ) , t ∈ M . (5) The motor encoder is pretrained using the masked trajectory reconstruction objective 

Ltraj = 1

|M| 

X

> t∈M

∥bpt − pt∥22 . (6) The behavioral representation of the trajectory is obtained by aggregating the contextualized trajectory tokens: 

zm = Pool ( Hm) , zm = zm

∥zm∥2

, (7) where Pool( ·) denotes token aggregation and zm is the normalized behavioral representation used as the target for neural–behavioral alignment. To disentangle the effects of behavioral source and pre-training scale, we evaluated four motor encoder initializa-tion strategies: training from scratch (Scratch), pretraining on macaque trajectories (Macaque-PT), pretraining on a scale-matched robotic trajectory subset (Robot-Matched-PT), and pretraining on the large-scale LIBERO-100 robotic trajec-tory dataset (Robot-Large-PT). In Scratch, the motor en-coder was randomly initialized and jointly optimized dur-ing neural alignment. Macaque-PT, Robot-Matched-PT, and Robot-Large-PT mean pretrained with macaque trajectories, robotic trajectories matched in size with macaque trajecto-ries, and larger-scale robotic trajectories, respectively. Then, keep frozen during neural alignment. Comparing Macaque-PT with Robot-Matched-PT isolates the effect of behav-ioral source under a matched data scale, whereas compar-ing Robot-Matched-PT with Robot-Large-PT evaluates the effect of increasing robotic pretraining scale. 

Neural Encoder 

We construct the neural encoder following the Perceiver-based POYO architecture (Azabou et al. 2023; Jaegle et al. 2021), which represents neural population activity as a se-quence of timestamped spike events and compresses the variable-length sequence into a fixed number of latent to-kens. For a neural window of duration T , let 

S = {(ui, t i)}Mi=1 (8) denote the M observed spike events, where ui is the identity of the neural unit that generated the i-th spike and ti ∈ [0 , T ]

is its timestamp. Each spike event is represented using a learnable unit embedding: 

xi = Eunit (ui), X = [ x1, x2, . . . , xM ] ∈ RM ×D .

(9) Temporal information is incorporated through rotary posi-tional embeddings (Su et al. 2024), allowing the attention operation to depend on the relative timing between spike events and latent tokens. For adapt to different numbers of spikes varies across windows, sessions, and neural popula-tions, we introduce N latent tokens 

Z0 = [ z0,1, z0,2, . . . , z0,N ] ∈ RN ×D , N ≪ M, (10) whose timestamps are uniformly distributed over the neural context window. The latent tokens first aggregate information from the spike-event sequence through cross-attention: 

Z1 = CrossAttn ( Z0, X) . (11) More specifically, the cross-attention operation is given by 

softmax RoPE ( Z0Wq , τ z ) RoPE ( XW k, τ x)⊤

√dk

!

XW v ,

(12) where τ x and τ z denote the timestamps assigned to the spike tokens and latent tokens, respectively, and Wq , Wk, and 

Wv are learnable projection matrices. The compressed latent sequence is subsequently processed by L − 1 Transformer self-attention blocks, The output of the final self-attention block as the neural representation: 

Zn = ZL = [ zL, 1, zL, 2, . . . , zL,N ] ∈ RN ×D . (13) Thus, ZL summarizes the temporal and population-level structure of the neural activity while maintaining a fixed dimensionality across recording sessions with different num-bers and identities of neural units. For modality alignment, the latent tokens are aggregated and transformed by a learn-able neural projection head gn:

zn = Pool ( Zn) , ezn = gn (zn) , (14) followed by ℓ2 normalization: 

zn = ezn

∥ezn∥2

. (15) The resulting representation zn is aligned with the corre-sponding behavioral representation produced by the frozen motor encoder. 

Modality Alignment 

After obtaining neural and behavioral representations, we align the two modalities using a CLIP-style symmetric con-trastive objective (Radford et al. 2021). Given a mini-batch of B temporally paired neural and behavioral samples, 

{(Si, Pi)}Bi=1 , (16) the neural encoder and frozen motor encoder get normalized behavioral representation and neural representation, 

{(zmi , zni )}Bi=1 , (17) We compute the cross-modal similarity between the i-th neu-ral representation and the j-th behavioral representation us-ing scaled cosine similarity: 

sij = (zni )⊤ zmj

τ , (18) where τ is a temperature parameter controlling the concen-tration of the similarity distribution. For each neural repre-sentation, its temporally paired behavioral representation is treated as the positive sample, whereas the remaining behav-ioral representations in the mini-batch are treated as negative samples. The neural-to-motor contrastive loss is defined as 

Ln→m = − 1

B

> B

X

> i=1

log exp( sii )

PBj=1 exp( sij ) . (19) Similarly, by treating each behavioral representation as a query and the neural representations as candidates, the motor-to-neural contrastive loss is 

Lm→n = − 1

B

> B

X

> i=1

log exp( sii )

PBj=1 exp( sji ) . (20) The final modality-alignment objective is the symmetric av-erage of the two directions: 

Lalign = 12 (Ln→m + Lm→n) . (21) During modality alignment, the pretrained motor encoder remains frozen, whereas the neural encoder and the neural projection head gn are optimized. The objective increases the similarity between temporally paired neural and behavioral representations while reducing the similarity between mis-matched pairs. Consequently, the neural encoder is encour-aged to preserve behaviorally relevant information shared with the pretrained behavioral representation space while suppressing recording-specific variability across units and sessions. Method CO ( R2 ) RT ( R2 )Wiener Filter 0.5010 ±0.0678 0.4240 ±0.0838 Smoothing 0.6457 ±0.0606 0.5588 ±0.0710 DenseNN 0.6261 ±0.0637 0.5681 ±0.0599 RNN 0.7028 ±0.0552 0.6439 ±0.0576 LFADS 0.7813 ±0.1020 0.6254 ±0.0765 NEDS 0.7635 ±0.0758 0.6121 ±0.0918 NDT2 0.9258 ±0.0031 0.6323 ±0.1339 POYO 0.9427 ±0.0019 0.7156 ±0.0966 NeuroPB 0.9478 ±0.0120 0.8475 ±0.0171 

Table 1: Comparison with baselines on single-session. 

Motor Decoder 

The motor decoder reconstructs the continuous movement trajectory from the aligned neural representation. Given the pooled neural representation zni , we employ a lightweight multilayer perceptron dψ to predict the trajectory: 

bPi = dψ (zni ) (22) It was trained jointly with the neural encoder; the total ob-jective was 

L = Lalign + Lmotor (23) where Lmotor was the mean-squared error between the pre-dicted and ground truth positions Lmotor = MSE( bP, P).

# Experiments and Results 

Datasets 

We evaluated our method on two datasets, a large-scale collection of electrophysiological and behavioral record-ings from four rhesus macaques performing two-dimensional reaching tasks (Perich, Gallego, and Miller 2018). Neural activity was recorded using chronically implanted multielec-trode arrays in the primary motor cortex (M1) and dorsal pre-motor cortex (PMd), with some sessions containing simulta-neous recordings from both regions and up to 192 electrodes. It contains two behavioral paradigms: center-out reaching (CO), in which the macaque moved a cursor from a central location toward one of eight peripheral targets arranged radi-ally, and random-target reaching (RT), in which the macaque continuously acquired targets presented at varying spatial locations. The dataset provides spike events together with synchronized cursor position and task-related metadata. The recordings span different collection sessions, subjects, and task structures, making them suitable for evaluating both within-domain decoding and generalization across sessions, subjects, and motor tasks. 

Implement Details 

Our method was implemented in PyTorch on an RTX 4090 GPU. We used the SparseLamb optimizer with a weight decay of 10 −4. The maximum learning rate was 

3.125 × 10 −4 × 128 = 0 .04 , where 128 is the batch size. The learning rate followed a one-cycle schedule with cosine annealing. After training, the checkpoint with the highest av-erage validation metric was evaluated once on the held-out 

Figure 3: Robot-Large-PT significantly outperforms Scratch on CO and RT and produces trajectories that more closely match the ground truth. *** denotes p < 0.001 .test set. Additional experimental details are provided in the Appendix. In all experiments, the training, validation, and test sets were defined by the predefined split-specific sam-pling intervals in the dataset configuration, with around 10% holdout for validation and 20% holdout for testing. The 1s window is used to sample from the training intervals. Vali-dation and test windows used 50% overlap within the same split. For cross experiments, the split was performed at the corresponding session level, such that all data from a given session were assigned to only one partition. 

Comparison with Baselines 

We compared NeuroPB with several classical and recent models on the center-out (CO) and random-target (RT) tasks. Table 1 shows the performance from Wiener Filter (Car-mena et al. 2003), Smoothing, DenseNN, RNN (Glaser et al. 2020), and LFADS (Pandarinath et al. 2018), which were reproduced using the same protocol. NEDS (Zhang et al. 2025), NDT2 (Ye et al. 2023), and POYO (Azabou et al. 2023) results were obtained from other publications (Ryoo et al. 2026; Mao et al. 2026). NeuroPB achieved the state-of-the-art decoding performance on both datasets, reaching 94.78% ±1.20% R2 on CO and 84.75% ±1.71% R2 on RT. The results indicate that NeuroPB remains effective for tasks with different movement structures. While several baselines performed reasonably well on the more structured CO task, their performance generally decreased on RT, which con-tains more variable target locations and trajectories. NeuroPB maintained strong performance on both tasks and showed low variability across evaluation sessions. These findings demon-strate that aligning neural activity with a pretrained behav-ioral representation provides a more accurate and robust ba-sis for continuous trajectory decoding than direct end-to-end decoding or neural-only representation learning. 

Effect of Pretrained Motor Encoder 

In the overall evaluation, NeuroPB uses the Robot-Large-PT motor encoder. To isolate the contribution of behavioral pre-training, we compared this initialization with Scratch, which means the motor encoder was initialized randomly and jointly optimized with neural alignment. As shown in the left panel of Fig. 3, behavioral pretraining substantially improved de-coding performance on both datasets. Statistical significance Figure 4: The left panel schematically illustrates the relative pretraining-data scales. The right panel shows comparable performance for Macaque-PT and Robot-Matched-PT, while Robot-Large-PT achieves the best decoding performance. was assessed using a two-sided paired t-test. On CO, Robot-Large-PT achieved an R2 of 94.78% compared with 84.19% for scratch. On RT, Robot-Large-PT achieved 84.75%, out-performing scratch at 76.29%. In addition to improving the average decoding accuracy, pretraining markedly reduced performance variability across evaluations, suggesting that the pretrained behavioral representation provides a more sta-ble target space for neural–behavioral alignment. The representative trajectory examples further illustrate this improvement in the right panel of Fig. 3. Predictions produced with the scratch motor encoder exhibit larger devi-ations from the ground-truth movement paths, whereas those produced with Robot-Large-PT more closely follow the over-all direction and geometry of the movements toward the tar-get. Together, these results demonstrate that the performance of NeuroPB does not arise solely from its alignment archi-tecture: behavioral pretraining is a critical component for learning accurate and robust neural trajectory decoders. 

Scaled Pretrained Motor Encoder 

We next examined whether the improvements from behav-ioral pretraining were determined primarily by the source of the trajectories or by the scale of the pretraining data. We compared three pretrained motor-encoder initializa-tions: Macaque-PT, Robot-Matched-PT, and Robot-Large-PT. Macaque-PT was pretrained on macaque trajectories, whereas Robot-Matched-PT was pretrained on trajectories from LIBERO-Spatial. The macaque and LIBERO-Spatial pretraining sets were matched in size, allowing the influence of behavioral source to be evaluated while approximately controlling for data scale. Robot-Large-PT was instead pre-trained on the substantially larger LIBERO-100 dataset, en-abling us to evaluate the effect of scaling robotic trajectory pretraining. Notably, the left panel of Fig. 4 provides only a conceptual illustration of the relative pretraining condi-tions and dataset scales. It is not derived from the measured decoding scores. As shown quantitatively in the right panel of Fig. 4, Macaque-PT and Robot-Matched-PT achieved comparable decoding performance despite the considerable difference between biological reaching movements and robotic manipu-lation trajectories. This result suggests that the motor encoder 

Figure 5: (A) Calibration-efficiency validation under cross-session, cross-subject, cross-task including CO-RT and RT-CO. (B) Estimated calibration fraction required by each pre-trained model to match the performance of Scratch using 100% of the data. learns transferable kinematic structures that are not restricted to the system from which the trajectories were collected. More importantly, Robot-Large-PT provided the stronger overall performance, outperforming both scale-matched con-ditions. Thus, although macaque and robotic trajectories are both effective sources of behavioral supervision, increas-ing the scale and diversity of robotic pretraining data pro-duces a stronger and more transferable behavioral representa-tion. These findings support the premise of NeuroPB: readily available behavioral data from artificial systems can comple-ment scarce neural recordings, and its benefit can be further increased by scaling and enriching behavioral pretraining. 

Calibration-Efficiency Validation 

We next evaluated whether behavioral pretraining reduces the amount of target-domain neural data required for adaptation across sessions, subjects, and motor tasks; the result is shown in Fig. 5A. Under each transfer setting, only the newly intro-duced unit and session embeddings were optimized using the fraction of target training data. In contrast, the scratch base-line initialized the entire model randomly and optimized all components using each calibration subset. More detailed cal-ibration settings are provided in the Appendix. Across all four settings, the Robot-Large-PT achieved the strongest perfor-mance in the low-data regime. Its advantage was particularly evident with only 1%–10% of the target data, where it con-Figure 6: (A) Pairwise similarity between neural and behav-ioral representations. (B) PCA visualization of neural rep-resentations before and after alignment, colored by move-ment direction and marked by recording session. Alignment improves directional organization while reducing session-dependent variation. sistently exceeded the Robot-Matched-PT, Macaque-PT, and scratch models. The performance gap gradually narrowed as more calibration data became available, but Robot-Large-PT remained competitive at full calibration. The calibration-efficiency summary in Fig. 5B further quantifies this advantage by estimating the fraction of tar-get data required to match the performance of the scratch model trained on 100% of the target data. Robot-Large-PT required less calibration data for generalization. In compar-ison, Macaque-PT and Robot-Matched-PT share a similar fraction of calibration data, and exhibited similar generaliza-tion and both substantially improved calibration efficiency relative to training from scratch. Increasing the scale and diversity of behavioral pretraining data produces more trans-ferable behavioral representations, even when the pretraining trajectories originate from robotic rather than biological sys-tems. 

Visualization Analysis 

To examine whether neural activity was aligned with the pretrained behavioral space, we computed the pairwise co-sine similarity between neural and behavioral representa-tions. The resulting similarity matrix in Fig. 6A exhibited a clear diagonal structure, indicating that each neural represen-tation was most similar to its corresponding behavioral rep-resentation, while mismatched pairs generally showed lower similarity. This pattern provides direct representation-level evidence that the alignment objective successfully maps neu-ral activity into a behaviorally meaningful embedding space. To further examine how motor alignment reshapes the learned neural representation, we visualized held-out neural windows from six recording sessions using PCA in Fig. 6B. Before alignment, the neural representations were dominated by session-specific variability: samples from different record-ing sessions showed noticeable separation, whereas represen-tations associated with different reach directions were sub-stantially intermixed. After projection into the pretrained be-havioral representation space, samples became more clearly structured according to reach direction, while marker shapes corresponding to different sessions were broadly intermin-gled within the same direction-related regions. These results suggest that motor alignment suppresses session-dependent Methods CO ( R2)w/o contrastive 0.8296 ±0.0424 w/o unit encoding 0.8825 ±0.0155 w/o RoPE 0.9011 ±0.0090 w/o cross attention 0.9182 ±0.0107 w/o self attention 0.9065 ±0.0133 Overall 0.9478 ±0.0120 Table 2: Ablation performance nuisance variation while preserving behaviorally relevant movement information, thereby producing a more session-invariant neural representation. 

Ablation Studies 

We conducted ablation experiments on the CO dataset to quantify the contribution of contrastive alignment and the key components of the neural encoder, as summarized in Ta-ble 2. We validated that removing the motor encoder struc-ture produced the largest degradation, with R2 of 0.8296 

± 0.0424. This substantial decrease, together with the in-creased performance variability, demonstrates that alignment with the pretrained behavioral representation space is criti-cal for learning accurate and stable neural representations. Among the neural-encoder components, removing unit en-coding caused the largest performance reduction, yielding an 

R2 of 0.8825 ±0.0155, which highlights the importance of preserving neuron-specific information. Removing RoPE re-duced performance to 0.9011 ±0.0090, confirming the value of explicitly modeling the relative temporal structure of spike sequences. Excluding latent self-attention resulted in an R2

of 0.9065 ±0.0133, indicating that interactions among latent tokens contribute to population-level representation learning. Removing cross-attention produced a smaller but consistent decrease to 0.9182 ±0.0107, demonstrating its role in selec-tively aggregating spike-token information. Overall, these results show that behavioral contrastive alignment provides the largest contribution, while unit identity, temporal encod-ing, cross-attention, and latent self-attention jointly support effective neural trajectory decoding. 

Conclusion 

We introduced NeuroPB, a neural decoding framework that transfers knowledge from pretrained behavioral representa-tions to motor trajectory decoding. By aligning neural activ-ity with a frozen behavioral representation space, NeuroPB consistently outperformed its scratch-trained counterpart. Macaque and scale-matched robotic trajectories provided comparable pretraining benefits, while large-scale robotic pretraining achieved the best performance, improved gener-alization, and calibration efficiency across sessions, subjects, and tasks. This study is limited to offline evaluation using in-vasive macaque recordings. Future work will extend behav-ioral pretraining and neural alignment to human recordings, including non-invasive neural signals, and evaluate NeuroPB in real-time closed-loop applications. References 

Azabou, M.; Arora, V.; Ganesh, V.; Mao, X.; Nachimuthu, S.; Mendelson, M.; Richards, B.; Perich, M.; Lajoie, G.; and Dyer, E. 2023. A unified, scalable framework for neural population decoding. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 36: 44937–44956. Azabou, M.; Pan, K.; Arora, V.; Knight, I.; Dyer, E.; and Richards, B. A. 2025. Multi-session, multi-task neural de-coding from distinct cell-types and brain regions. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, 59654–59677. Carmena, J. M.; Lebedev, M. A.; Crist, R. E.; O’Doherty, J. E.; Santucci, D. M.; Dimitrov, D. F.; Patil, P. G.; Hen-riquez, C. S.; and Nicolelis, M. A. L. 2003. Learning to control a brain–machine interface for reaching and grasping by primates. PLoS Biology , 1(2): e42. Défossez, A.; Caucheteux, C.; Rapin, J.; Kabeli, O.; and King, J.-R. 2023. Decoding speech perception from non-invasive brain recordings. Nature Machine Intelligence ,5(10): 1097–1107. Dyer, E. L.; Gheshlaghi Azar, M.; Perich, M. G.; Fernandes, H. L.; Naufel, S.; Miller, L. E.; and Körding, K. P. 2017. A cryptography-based approach for movement decoding. Na-ture Biomedical Engineering , 1(12): 967–976. Fishbach, A.; Roy, S. A.; Bastianen, C.; Miller, L. E.; and Houk, J. C. 2007. Deciding when and how to correct a move-ment: discrete submovements as a decision making process. 

Experimental brain research , 177(1): 45–63. Glaser, J. I.; Benjamin, A. S.; Chowdhury, R. H.; Perich, M. G.; Miller, L. E.; and Kording, K. P. 2020. Machine learning for neural decoding. eneuro , 7(4). Jaegle, A.; Borgeaud, S.; Alayrac, J.-B.; Doersch, C.; Ionescu, C.; Ding, D.; Koppula, S.; Zoran, D.; Brock, A.; Shelhamer, E.; et al. 2021. Perceiver io: A general ar-chitecture for structured inputs & outputs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.14795 .Keshtkaran, M. R.; Sedler, A. R.; Chowdhury, R. H.; Tandon, R.; Basrai, D.; Nguyen, S. L.; Sohn, H.; Jazayeri, M.; Miller, L. E.; and Pandarinath, C. 2022. A large-scale neural network training framework for generalized estimation of single-trial population dynamics. Nature methods , 19(12): 1572–1577. Lee, J. Y.; Lee, S.; Mishra, A.; Yan, X.; McMahan, B.; Ga-isford, B.; Kobashigawa, C.; Qu, M.; Xie, C.; and Kao, J. C. 2025. Brain–computer interface control with artificial intel-ligence copilots. Nature machine intelligence , 7(9): 1510– 1523. Liu, B.; Zhu, Y.; Gao, C.; Feng, Y.; Liu, Q.; Zhu, Y.; and Stone, P. 2023. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 44776–44791. Mao, X.; Krishna, N. H.; Ryoo, A. H.-W.; Perich, M. G.; and Lajoie, G. 2026. Leveraging unlabelled data for generalizable neural population decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.14086 .Merel, J.; Botvinick, M.; and Wayne, G. 2019. Hierarchical motor control in mammals and machines. Nature communi-cations , 10(1): 5489. O’Neill, A.; Rehman, A.; Maddukuri, A.; Gupta, A.; Padalkar, A.; Lee, A.; Pooley, A.; Gupta, A.; Mandlekar, A.; Jain, A.; et al. 2024. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models: Open x-embodiment collaboration 0. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 6892–6903. IEEE. Pandarinath, C.; O’Shea, D. J.; Collins, J.; Jozefowicz, R.; Stavisky, S. D.; Kao, J. C.; Trautmann, E. M.; Kaufman, M. T.; Ryu, S. I.; Hochberg, L. R.; et al. 2018. Infer-ring single-trial neural population dynamics using sequential auto-encoders. Nature Methods , 15(10): 805–815. Perich, M. G.; Gallego, J. A.; and Miller, L. E. 2018. A neural population mechanism for rapid learning. Neuron , 100(4): 964–976. Radford, A.; Kim, J. W.; Hallacy, C.; Ramesh, A.; Goh, G.; Agarwal, S.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A.; Mishkin, P.; Clark, J.; et al. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 8748–8763. PMLR. Ryoo, A. H.-W.; Krishna, N. H.; Mao, X.; Azabou, M.; Dyer, E. L.; Perich, M. G.; and Lajoie, G. 2026. Generalizable, real-time neural decoding with hybrid state-space models. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38: 51764–51791. Schneider, S.; Lee, J. H.; and Mathis, M. W. 2023. Learnable latent embeddings for joint behavioural and neural analysis. 

Nature , 617(7960): 360–368. Song, Y.; Liu, B.; Li, X.; Shi, N.; Wang, Y.; and Gao, X. 2023. Decoding natural images from EEG for object recognition. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13234 .Su, J.; Ahmed, M.; Lu, Y.; Pan, S.; Bo, W.; and Liu, Y. 2024. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing , 568: 127063. Tian, K.; Zhao, S.; Zhang, Y.; and Yu, S. 2026. Multi-dimensional neural decoding with orthogonal representa-tions for brain-computer interfaces. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, 2092–2100. Walke, H. R.; Black, K.; Zhao, T. Z.; Vuong, Q.; Zheng, C.; Hansen-Estruch, P.; He, A. W.; Myers, V.; Kim, M. J.; Du, M.; et al. 2023. Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot learning at scale. In Conference on Robot Learning , 1723–1736. PMLR. Wen, C.; Lin, X.; So, J.; Chen, K.; Dou, Q.; Gao, Y.; and Abbeel, P. 2023. Any-point trajectory modeling for policy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00025 .Willsey, M. S.; Shah, N. P.; Avansino, D. T.; Hahn, N. V.; Jamiolkowski, R. M.; Kamdar, F. B.; Hochberg, L. R.; Wil-lett, F. R.; and Henderson, J. M. 2025a. A high-performance brain–computer interface for finger decoding and quad-copter game control in an individual with paralysis. Nature Medicine , 1–9. Willsey, M. S.; Shah, N. P.; Avansino, D. T.; Hahn, N. V.; Jamiolkowski, R. M.; Kamdar, F. B.; Hochberg, L. R.; Wil-lett, F. R.; and Henderson, J. M. 2025b. A high-performance brain–computer interface for finger decoding and quad-copter game control in an individual with paralysis. Nature Medicine , 31(1): 96–104. Xia, W.; de Charette, R.; Oztireli, C.; and Xue, J.-H. 2024. UMBRAE: Unified multimodal brain decoding. In European Conference on Computer Vision , 242–259. Springer. Ye, J.; Collinger, J.; Wehbe, L.; and Gaunt, R. 2023. Neu-ral data transformer 2: multi-context pretraining for neural spiking activity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 80352–80374. Ye, J.; and Pandarinath, C. 2021. Representation learning for neural population activity with neural data transformers. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.01210 .Ye, J.; Rizzoglio, F.; Ma, X.; Smoulder, A.; Mao, H.; Blu-menthal, G.; Hockeimer, W.; Kunigk, N.; Moore, D.; Marino, P.; et al. 2026. A generalist intracortical motor decoder. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38: 110547–110587. Zhang, W.; Wang, S.; Su, Y.; Li, X.; Zhang, C.; and Zhong, S. 2026a. Neurobridge: Bio-inspired self-supervised eeg-to-image decoding via cognitive priors and bidirectional se-mantic alignment. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, 18028–18036. Zhang, Y.; He, L.; Fan, C.; Liu, T.; Yu, H.; Le, T.; Li, J.; Linderman, S.; Duncker, L.; Willett, F. R.; et al. 2026b. A cross-species neural foundation model for end-to-end speech decoding. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Zhang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Azabou, M.; Andre, A.; Wang, Z.; Lyu, H.; Laboratory, T. I. B.; Dyer, E.; Paninski, L.; and Hurwitz, C. 2025. Neural encoding and decoding at scale. ArXiv ,arXiv–2504. Appendix 

# Experimental Details 

Details of robotic pretraining datasets 

Fig. 4 provides the conceptual illustration of the relative pretraining conditions and dataset scales. It is not derived from the measured decoding scores. Here, I will explain the definition of scale and diversity. Robot-Matched-PT was pre-trained using LIBERO-Spatial, which contains 10 language-conditioned manipulation tasks designed to vary the spatial relationships and layouts of a common set of objects. Each task includes 50 human-teleoperated demonstrations, yield-ing 500 robotic trajectories in total. This dataset was com-parable in scale to the macaque trajectory set and therefore enabled the influence of behavioral source to be examined while approximately controlling for pretraining-data size. Robot-Large-PT was instead pretrained using LIBERO-100, which contains 100 manipulation tasks with 50 demon-strations per task, yielding 5,000 trajectories—ten times the scale of LIBERO-Spatial. LIBERO-100 additionally covers a substantially broader range of object configurations, spa-tial layouts, manipulation goals, and long-horizon behav-iors. Each LIBERO demonstration provides synchronized workspace- and wrist-camera observations, proprioceptive states, robot actions, and a language task specification. After the preprocessing procedure of CoTracker, the demonstra-tion videos were converted into point-track trajectories us-ing an off-the-shelf visual tracker and subsequently used to pretrain the motor encoder. Thus, the comparison between Robot-Matched-PT and Macaque-PT primarily evaluates the effect of behavioral source, whereas the comparison between Robot-Matched-PT and Robot-Large-PT evaluates the com-bined benefit of increased robotic data scale and behavioral diversity. 

Motor Encoder Architecture 

The pretrained motor-trajectory encoder used an eight-layer Transformer with a hidden dimension of 384, eight at-tention heads, a patch size of 4, and attention and feed-forward dropout rates of 0.2. For each of the 100 trajec-tory time points, a local segment containing 16 consecutive two-dimensional coordinates was constructed. Each 16-step segment was divided into four non-overlapping patches, pro-ducing four 384-dimensional latent tokens. The motor en-coder was kept frozen during alignment and motor-decoder Algorithm 1: Training and inference of NeuroPB 

Require: Paired neural–trajectory data {(Si, Pi, s i)}Bi=1  

> 1:

Neural–Motor Alignment and Decoding  

> 2:

for each paired mini-batch do  

> 3:

for i = 1 , . . . , B do  

> 4:

xi,j ← Eunit (ui,j ) + Esession (si) 

> 5:

Zi, 1 ← CrossAttn RoPE (Zi, 0, Xi) 

> 6:

Zi,L ← SelfAttnBlocks( Zi, 1) 

> 7:

ezni ← gn(Pool( Zi,L ))  

> 8:

zni ← Norm( ezni ) 

> 9:

Hmi ← fθm (Emi ) 

> 10:

zmi ← Norm(Pool( Hmi ))  

> 11:

bPi ← dψ (zni ) 

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

sij ← (zni )⊤zmj /τ  

> 14:

Lalign ← 12 (Ln→m + Lm→n) 

> 15:

Ldec ← 1

> B

P 

> i

∥ bPi − Pi∥22 

> 16:

L ← L dec + Lalign  

> 17:

Update θn, gn, and ψ 

> 18:

end for  

> 19: 20:

Inference  

> 21:

ZL ← fθn (S) 

> 22:

zn ← gn(Pool( ZL))  

> 23:

bP ← dψ (zn) 

> 24:

return bP

training. 

Neural Encoder Architecture 

The neural encoder processed 1-s neural windows using a latent interval of 0.125 s and 16 latent tokens per interval, yielding N = 128 latent tokens per window. The encoder had a hidden dimension of D = 64 and contained L = 6 

latent self-attention layers. It used eight self-attention heads, two cross-attention heads, and an attention-head dimension of 64. The feed-forward, linear, and attention dropout rates were 0.2, 0.4, and 0.2, respectively. Figure 1: Trajectory decoding results on the CO and RT tasks. The left panels show predicted and ground-truth two-dimensional position trajectories, while the middle and right panels show the corresponding x- and y-axis velocity profiles over time. The predictions closely follow the ground truth for both the structured center-out movements and the more complex random-target trajectories. 

Projection Layer Architecture 

Separate projection heads were used to map the neural and motor representations into a shared 3,200-dimensional space. On the neural side, the 128 latent-token representations were averaged to obtain a 64-dimensional representation, which was projected through a two-layer multilayer perceptron with dimensions 3200, a ReLU activation, and dropout of 0.3. On the motor side, the four 384-dimensional tokens associated with each local trajectory segment were averaged, produc-ing one 384-dimensional representation at each of the 100 trajectory time points. A learnable projection layer mapped each representation from 384 to 32 dimensions. Concate-nating the resulting 100 32-dimensional features produced a 3,200-dimensional motor representation. The neural and motor representations were normalized before computing the alignment losses. Finally, the motor decoder projected the 3,200-dimensional representation through a multi-layer perception to a 200-dimensional output, which was reshaped into 100 two-dimensional motor predictions. 

Training and Optimization Details 

Training used a batch size of 128 and the SparseLamb op-timizer with a weight decay of 10 −4. The learning rate was controlled by a one-cycle cosine schedule, with a warm-up fraction of 0.05 and a final learning-rate division factor of 100. According to the default configuration and implementa-tion, the maximum learning rate was 3.125 × 10 −4 × 128 = 0.04 . The contrastive temperature was learnable and ini-tialized to τ = 0 .07 . The objective combined the motor-decoding loss and a symmetric cross-entropy contrastive loss, with default weights of 1. 

Figure 2: Generalization performance is reported under cross-session, cross-subject, CO-RT, and RT-CO transfer set-tings. Bars represent the mean R2 obtained using Robot-Large-PT, Robot-Matched-PT, Macaque-PT, and Scratch, and error bars indicate the standard deviation. Statistical comparisons are performed between each pretrained con-dition and Scratch. ∗p < 0.05 and ∗∗ p < 0.01 .

Calibration Details 

In the transfer experiments, calibration was performed using only the labeled fraction of the training set from the target ses-sions. The pretrained representation encoder was initialized from the source-domain checkpoint and kept fixed, while the unit and session embeddings encoding in the neural encoder were optimized on the calibration data. Model selection and early stopping were based exclusively on the whole validation data from the target sessions, after which the calibrated model was evaluated once on the remaining held-out target-session test data. Thus, no target-test samples or labels were used for parameter fitting, hyperparameter selection, or checkpoint selection. 

# Additional Results 

Decoding Results 

Fig. 1 shows more decoding results. It compares the trajecto-ries predicted by NeuroPB with the corresponding ground-truth movements on the center-out (CO) and random-target (RT) tasks. For each task, the left panel shows the re-constructed two-dimensional position trajectories, while the middle and right panels present the temporal profiles of the velocity components along the x- and y-axes, respectively. The predicted trajectories closely follow the ground truth across both the regular, direction-specific movements in CO and the more complex, variable trajectories in RT, demon-strating the model’s ability to recover both spatial movement patterns and temporal dynamics. Generation Result 

Fig. 2 reports the generalization performance, i.e., when 100% of the available target-domain calibration data were used. In both the cross-session and cross-subject settings, all behaviorally pretrained models significantly outperformed the Scratch condition, demonstrating that behavioral pre-training remains beneficial even with full target-domain calibration. The improvement was also observed under cross-task transfer. For CO-RT transfer, Robot-Large-PT and Macaque-PT achieved significant improvements over Scratch, whereas Robot-Matched-PT showed a smaller, non-significant improvement. For RT-CO transfer, all pretrained conditions significantly outperformed Scratch. Moreover, Robot-Large-PT significantly outperformed both Robot-Matched-PT and Macaque-PT, indicating an additional ben-efit from larger scale and diversity of robotic pretraining. Overall, Robot-Large-PT achieved the strongest generaliza-tion performance across the evaluated settings, supporting the benefit of large-scale behavioral pretraining for general-ization across recording sessions, subjects, and motor tasks.